# Introduction

This document gives an overview over the current state of the software
base developed by the *Berlin United - Nao Team Humboldt* to control a
humanoid robot in the context of the robot soccer competition *RoboCup*.
The release of the code base accompanying this report and the
corresponding technical documentation can be found under the following
links:

Docu: 

:   <https://github.com/BerlinUnited/NaoTH/wiki>

Code: 

:   <https://github.com/BerlinUnited/NaoTH>

## Team

The research group *NaoTH* is part of the research lab for Adaptive
Systems at Humboldt-Universit√§t zu Berlin headed by Prof. Verena Hafner.
At the current state the core team consists of about 12 students of
Bachelor, Master/Diploma, and PhD levels. Besides the direct
participation at the RoboCup competitions NaoTH is involved in teaching
at the university, public engagement and building of the RoboCup
community.

*NaoTH* was founded at the end of 2007 at the AI research lab headed by
Prof. Hans-Dieter Burkhard. As a direct successor of the *Aibo Team
Humboldt* which was active in the Four Legged League of the RoboCup as a
part of the *GermanTeam* until 2008. GermanTeam won the world
championship three times during its existence.

*NaoTH* participated yearly at the RoboCup competitions since the first
SPL competition in 2008 in Suzhou. The most recent achievements include
3rd place in the Outdoor Competition at the RoboCup world championship
in 2016 and 2nd place in the Mixed Team Competition as part of the team
DoBerMan at the RoboCup 2017.

In 2010 and 2011 we also competed in the 3D Simulation league with the
same code as used for the SPL. In the 3D Simulation, we won the German
Open and the AutCup competitions and achieved the 2nd place at the
RoboCup World Championship 2010 in Singapore.

In 2011 we formed a conjoint team *Berlin United* with the team
FUmanoids from Berlin, which participated in the KidSize League. The
collaboration included extensive exchange of experience, sharing of code
and organization of joint workshops. In 2017 the team FUmanoids ceased
to exist. Since then *NaoTH* remains the only member of Berlin United
and continues to compete under this name.

In 2017 and 2018 *NaoTH* competed together with the team NaoDevils as
joint team *DoBerMan* at the RoboCup SPL Mixed Team Competition and
achieved 2nd place in both years. In 2017 *NaoTH* won the 2nd place in
the challenger shield and in 2018 reached the quarterfinals in the
champions cup of the main competition.

## Summary

Our general research fields include agent-oriented techniques and
Machine Learning with applications in Cognitive Robotics. Currently, we
mainly focus on the following topics:

-   Software architecture for autonomous agents (section
    [2](#s:architecture){reference-type="ref"
    reference="s:architecture"})

-   Narrowing the gap between simulated and real robots (section
    [3.5](#s:simulation){reference-type="ref" reference="s:simulation"})

-   Dynamic motion generation (section
    [6](#s:dynamic_motions){reference-type="ref"
    reference="s:dynamic_motions"})

-   World modeling (section [5](#s:modeling){reference-type="ref"
    reference="s:modeling"})






