# Motion Control

The performance of a soccer robot is highly dependent on its motion
ability. Together with the ability to walk, the kicking motion is one of
the most important motions in a soccer game. However, at the current
state the most common approaches of implementing the kick are based on a
key frame technique. Such solutions are inflexible and take a lot of
time to adjust the robots position correctly in order to use a key frame
motion effectively. Moreover, they are hard to integrate into the
general motion flow, e.g. to change between walk and kick the robot
usually has to change to a special stand position.

Fixed motions such as keyframe nets perform well in deterministic
environments, but they are restrictive. More flexible motions must be
able to adapt to different conditions. Four possible specifications are
adaptation to control demands, e.g. required changes of speed and
direction to enable omnidirectional walk, adaptation to the environment,
e.g. different floors with different heights and angles, kick execution
according to ball state and fluent change between walk and kick.

At the current state we have a stable version of an omnidirectional walk
control and a dynamic kick, both used in our gameplay. Along with
further improvements of the dynamic walk and kick motions our current
research focuses in particular on *integration* of the motions, e.g. a
fluent change between walk and kick.

Adaptation to changing conditions requires feedback from sensors. We
experiment with the different sensors of the NAO. Especially, adaptation
to the visual data, e.g. the seen ball or optical flow, is investigated.
Problems arise from sensor noise and delays within the feedback loop. As
a correlated project we also investigate the paradigm of local control
loops, e.g. we extended the Nao with additional sensors.

## Walk {#s:walk}

The algorithm we use to accomplish a walking motion can be subdivided
into four components: the path planner, the step planner, the preview
controller and stabilization.

The path planner is currently of very primitive nature, acting solely as
a bridge for certain movement routines between behavior and motion
control. The behavior part is presented in chapter
[7](#s:behavior){reference-type="ref" reference="s:behavior"}.

At first, the step planner determines the target position for the next
step considering the walk request and various stability criteria. After
that, a sequence of desired ZMPs (zero moment points) is planned for
each execution cycle of that step. This sequence of ZMPs is used by the
preview controller to compute the trajectory of the COM (center of mass)
during the execution of the step assuming a linear inverted pendulum
model. While the step is executed the foot's 3D trajectory is calculated
on demand and combined with the corresponding COM pose to finally
determine the target joint configuration using inverse kinematics.
Figure
[\[fig:naoth_walking_engine_overview\]](#fig:naoth_walking_engine_overview){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:naoth_walking_engine_overview"} shows a overview of the
walking engine.

### Path Planner

The path planner is intended to calculate a collision free and optimal
path from the robot towards a goal. Currently that intention is not
fulfilled. Instead it is used as a bridge between behavior described in
chapter [7](#s:behavior){reference-type="ref" reference="s:behavior"}
and motion control. The behavior requests a certain routine, e.g. that
the robot walks to the ball, and the path planner executes that routine
by requesting steps from motion control. The types of routines that are
implemented inside the path planner are walking or kicking routines.

Currently, there are two different interfaces to walk requests, i.e.
standard and step control. A standard walk request consists of a target
pose $(x, y, \theta)$, a frame of reference for the target pose in form
of a local coordinate with its origin in the left foot, the right foot
or the hip and a flag signaling fast, normal or slow step execution.
Step control extends the standard interface by adding the following
parameters: the target foot, the execution time in $ms$, an angle $d$
that impacts the final trajectory and $s\in[0,\,1]$ which can scale the
final trajectory resulting in faster execution. The flag in the standard
interface maps itself to $s$.

Step control allows for more fine-grained control over the actual steps,
e.g. allowing retraction of the kicking foot after kick execution, and
is thus preferred, but the standard interface is kept for backwards
compatibility as not all possible movement routines related to walking
are implemented inside the path planner. To allow this fine-grained
control over actual steps the path planner implements a simple mechanism
to ensure that a desired step is requested until actual execution of the
step, unless the step becomes obsolete in the process.

### Step Planner

The step planner calculates the next 2D positions of the feet based on
the walk request inside the motion request.

The walk request and the current pose of the moving foot are transformed
into the local coordinate system of the supporting foot. The supporting
foot is the one that isn't executing the current step. The local
coordinate system of the supporting foot is chosen for this as it is
static whilst the step is being executed. This is not the case for the
moving foot or the hip. The walk request is then applied to said current
pose of the target foot resulting in the target pose for the step.

If the walk request was made using the standard interface the step
planner is responsible for choosing the moving foot. Step control
requests a specific foot explicitly.

The requested steps are restricted in regard of anatomic constraints as
well as to increase the walks stability. A step is restricted
elliptically in x-y-plane in general. The normal steps final dimensions
are scaled by the cosine of the requested rotation. A big rotation
therefore results in a small translation. In addition, the change in the
step size is also restricted to increase stability. This prevents the
robot to begin walking with the maximal possible step size. After
applying these restrictions the step is finally added to the step
buffer.

Independent of the requested steps the step planner might insert zero
steps for increasing the stability of the walk. A zero step is a step in
which no foot is moved.

### Preview Control

The Preview Controller calculates the trajectory for the COM based on
planed ZMPs. For estimating a stable trajectory for the COM we assume a
linear inverted pendulum model with constant height. In each planning
cycle of a step a target ZMP is added to the ZMP-buffer. The ZMP-buffer
is used by the preview controller to calculate the target position,
velocity and acceleration of the COM during a step. The following
equation is used to determine the control vector [@Xu14Dissertation]:
$$u = -\underbrace{K_x x_k}_{state feedback} - K_I \underbrace{\sum_{i=0}^k (p_k - p_k^{ref})}_{accumulated ZMP error} - \underbrace{\begin{bmatrix} f_1, f_2, \ldots, f_N\end{bmatrix}}_{preview\, gain} \underbrace{\begin{bmatrix} p_{k+1}^{ref}\\ p_{k+2}^{ref}\\ \vdots \\ p_{k+N}^{ref}\end{bmatrix}}_{future ZMP}$$
Where $x_k$ is a vector describing the location, velocity and
acceleration of the COM at time $k$. $p_k$ is the ZMP and $p_k^{ref}$
the target ZMP at time $k$. $K_x$, $K_I$ and $f_1, \cdots, f_N$ are the
parameters of the preview controller and are pre-calculated. The next
target COM $x_{k+1}$ can be calculated using a linear motion model:
$$x_{k+1} = Ax_k + ub$$

### Stabilization

The simplified model can easily be affected by disturbances in the
environment. Therefore a closed loop stabilization is required.

Different control techniques are used during step creation and execution
to accomplish a stable walk.

During step creation the target step is adapted by a P-D-Controller
mechanism to compensate small errors in the COM's position. Another
mechanism uses the average COM-Error. If the average COM-Error exceeds a
threshold an emergency stop is performed. This emergency stop is
realized by zero-steps. As long as the COM-Error doesn't drop below a
threshold the robot won't execute a step which is requested by a
Walk-Request.

During the execution of a step three stabilization mechanisms are used.
At first the height of the hip and its rotation around the x axis are
adapted to compensate the moments appearing while a foot is lifted. A
second stabilizer tries to keep the upper body in an upright position
the whole time. And a third controller adapts the ankles according to
the current orientation of the robot's body and its change in
orientation.

## Energy Efficient Stand

During games we have to deal with two problems regarding the hardware of
the robots. The first problem is the increasing temperature of the
joints, which affects the stability of walking. The second problem is
the overall power consumption limiting the operational time. We observed
that the robots are standing a lot on strategic positions during the
game causing high energy consumption. The core of the problem seems to
be that when going to the stand pose the joints are never reached
completely and so remain in a state of permanent tension. In particular
this can happen when the last step before stand was not completed
exactly and the feet are a bit shifted. Therefore to address both
problems we try to reduce the energy consumption and temperature
increase during standing.

After the robot reached the target standing pose the *measured* joint
positions are used as new target joint angles to ensure that each joint
really reached the target position and thus relaxing the joints.
Reducing the applied stiffness on the motors will result in a reduction
of the applied current and so reduce temperature increase and the energy
consumption. Additionally we try to use as less stiffness as possible
while maintaining a posture close to the target standing pose. To
achieve that the stiffness is linearly interpolated between 0.3 and 1
depending on the joint angle error for each joint.

The knee pitch and ankle pitch joints are the joints which have to carry
most of the load. It was observed that in some cases the applied current
can be reduced significantly if the target position of these joints is
relaxed by the minimal step size of the motors. Therefore an offset is
added to the joint positions. Every second the offset of the joint with
the highest current consumption is relaxed, i.e., increased (for knees)
or decreased (for ankles), by the minimal step size of the motors.

Both energy saving approaches may result in a drifting of center of
mass. So if the difference to the target center of mass becomes too
large regarding translation and rotation the offset are reset and the
standing posture is corrected again with full stiffness.